Principles of Programming Languages 2026
Assignment 3
Responsible TA: Ariel Grunfeld
Submission Date: 25/5/2026
Part 0: Preliminaries
Structure of a TypeScript Project
Every TypeScript assignment will come with two very important files:
- package.json - lists the dependencies of the project.
- tsconfig.json - specifies the TypeScript compiler options.
Before starting to work on your assignment, open a command prompt in your assignment folder and run
npm install to install the dependencies.
Whathappenswhenyourunnpm installandthefilepackage.jsonispresentinthefolderisthefollowing:

# 1. npm will download all required modules and their dependencies from the internet into the folder

node_modules.

# 2. A file package-lock.json is created which lists the exact version of all the packages that have been

installed.
What tsconfig.json controls is the way the TypeScript compiler (tsc) analyzes and typechecks the code
in this project. We will use for all the assignments the strongest form of type-checking, which is called the
“strict” mode of the tsc compiler.
Do not delete or change these files (e.g., install new packages or change compiler options), as we will run
your code against our own copy of those files, exactly the way we provide them.
If you change these files, your code may run on your machine but not when we test it, which may lead to a
situation where you believe your code is correct, but you would fail to pass compilation when we grade the
assignment (which means a grade of zero).

Testing Your Code
Every TypeScript assignment will have Jest as a global dependency for testing purposes (so no need to
```python
import it). In order to run the tests, save your tests in the test directory in a file ending with .test.ts
```
and run npm test from a command prompt. This will activate the execution of the tests you have specified
in the test file and report the results of the tests in a very nice format.
An example test file assignmentX.test.ts might look like this:
```python
import { sum } from "../src/assignmentX";
describe("Assignment X", () => {
it("sums two numbers", () => {
```
expect(sum(1, 2)).toEqual(3);
```
});
});
```
Every function you want to test must be export-ed, for example, in assignmentX.ts, so that it can be
import-ed in the .test.ts file (and by our automatic test script when we grade the assignment).
```javascript
export const sum = (a: number, b: number) => a + b;
```
You are given some basic tests in the test directory, just to make sure you are on the right track during the
assignment.
What to Submit
You should submit a zip file called <id1>_<id2>.zip which has the following structure:
/
Part1.pdf
src/
L5/
L5-typecheck.ts
L5-substitution-adt.ts
L5-type-equations.ts
Make sure that when you extract the zip (using unzip on Linux), the result is flat, i.e., not inside a folder
(the file Part1.pdf is in the root directory). This structure is crucial for us to be able to import your code
to our tests. Also, make sure the file is a .zip file – not a RAR or TAR or any other compression format.

Part 1: Theoretical Questions [35 pts]
Submit the solution to this part as Part1.pdf. We can’t stress this enough: the file has to be a PDF file.
Question 1.1: [6 points]
For each of the following typing statement, write whether it is true or false. If false, explain why:

# 1. {f:(T1 -> T2), g:(T1 -> T2), a: T1} ⊢ (f (g a)):T2


# 2. {f:(T1 * T2 -> T3)} ⊢ (lambda (x) (f x y)): (T2 -> T3)


# 3. {f:(T1 * T2 -> T3), y: T2} ⊢ (lambda (x) (f x y)):(T1 -> T3)

Question 1.2: [15 points]
Perform type inference manually on the following expressions, using the Type Equations method.
In your answer, provide the following:
i. List the pool of fresh type variables assigned to each sub-expression.
ii. List the equations generated by rules for the sub-expressions, on the first stage of the inference algo-
rithm. (there is no need to list the equations generated during the unification)
iii. According to the success or failure of the inference:
If the inference succeeds: Write the final substitution generated by the unification algorithm.
If the inference fails: Explain which error you get and what triggered it. (For example: For
((lambda (f x) (f x)) 4 sqrt)itfailsbecausethealgorithmistryingtosolvetheconflictingequa-
tion [Tx -> T2] = Number)

# 1. (lambda (f1 g1 x1 y1) (f1 (g1 y1 x1) (g1 x1 y1)))


# 2. ((lambda (f1) (lambda (x1) (f1 x1 x1))) (lambda (y1) y1))


# 3. ((lambda (f1) (lambda (x1) ((f1 x1) x1))) (lambda (y1) y1))

Question 1.3: Sum Types [14 points]
In TypeScript, we learned how to combine union types and string literals to a pattern called tagged union,
allowing you to discriminately pack expressions of different types under the same type. In this question, we
consider the introduction of a simplified version of it to Scheme, called sum types.
Given two types TE1 and TE2, the sum type of TE1 and TE2, denoted as (TE1 + TE2), has the following
values:
(left E) : (TE1 + TE2) where E : TE1
(right E) : (TE1 + TE2) where E : TE2
Where left and right are added to the set of keywords of the language, and (left E) and (right E) are
added to the syntax as special forms.
So, for example, both (left 2) and (right #t) are values of type (number + boolean).
Semantically, the value of (left E) is (left V), and the value of (right E) is (right V), where V is the
valueofE.So,forexample,thevalueof(left (+ 3 4))is(left 7),andthevalueof(right (and #t #f))
is (right #f). (Intuitively, you can think of (left 7) as a symbol '(left . 7), and (right #f) as a
symbol '(right . #f))

Following this logic, we get the following type constraints for the left and right special forms:
i. For the pool:
T0 (left E)
T1 E
we get the equation:
T0 = T1 + T
where T is a fresh type variable.
That’s the equational way of saying: “Whenever E is a term of type T1, (left E) is a term of type
T1 + T, for some arbitrary type T”.
ii. For the pool:
T0 (right E)
T1 E
we get the equation:
T0 = T + T1
where T is a fresh type variable.
That’s the equational way of saying: “Whenever E is a term of type T1, (right E) is a term of type
T + T1, for some arbitrary type T”.
Using the type constraints specified above, perform type inference manually on the following expression:
(lambda (f) (f (right (lambda (s) (f (left s))))))
In your answer, provide the following:
i. List the pool of fresh type variables assigned to each sub-expression.
ii. List the equations generated by rules for the sub-expressions, on the first stage of the inference algo-
rithm. (there is no need to list the equations generated during the unification)
iii. According to the success or failure of the inference:
If the inference succeeds: Write the final substitution generated by the unification algorithm.
If the inference fails: Explain which error you get and what triggered it.

| T0 | (left E) |
| --- | --- |
| T1 | E |


| T0 | (right E) |
| --- | --- |
| T1 | E |


Part 2: Type Checking: Support define and L5 Expressions [30
points]
Question 2.1: [10 points] define
In L5, add support for define expressions in the type checker. For example, the following code should be
typed with void:
(define (myvar : number) 5)
The following code should raise a type error:
(define (myvar : number) (lambda (x y) (+ x y)))
Guidelines
Implement the function typeofDefine in src/L5/L5-typecheck.ts.
You may add other helper functions to src/L5/L5-typecheck.ts if you need.
Question 2.2: [20 points] L5 Program
Add support for checking the type of an entire program, which is a sequence of expressions wrapped in a
boundary:
(L5 <exp>+)
Recall that the value of the program is the value of the last expression, so similarly, the type of the program
is the type of the last expression.
For example, the following code should be typed with number:
(L5 (define x 5) (and #t #f) (+ x 9))
Guidelines
Implement the function typeofProgram in src/L5/L5-typecheck.ts.
You may add other helper functions to src/L5/L5-typecheck.ts if you need.

Part 3: Type Inference: Support the (list T) Compound Type [35
points]
Add support for the type of (homogeneous) lists in the type inference code.
The type of lists is defined in src/L5/TExp.ts as ListTExp.
Values of type (list T) are either:
i. An empty list '()
ii. A non-empty list: A pair '(<head> . <tail>) where <head> is a value of type T and <tail> is a
value of type (list T)
Guidelines
Make the following changes to the code:

# 1. [6 points] Primitive operators: In src/L5/L5-typecheck.ts: Modify typeofPrim to compute the

types of cons, car, and cdr. They should have the following types (for an arbitrary type variable T):
cons : (T * (list T) -> (list T))
car : ((list T) -> T)
cdr : ((list T) -> (list T))

# 2. Type substitution: In src/L5/L5-substitution-adt.ts:

(a) [4 points] Modify checkNoOccurrence to check if there are no occurrences of a type variable in a
ListTExp.
(b) [4 points] Modify applySub to apply a type substitution to a ListTExp.

# 3. Unification: In src/L5/L5-type-equations.ts:

(a) [5 points] Modify expToPool to generate a pool of fresh type variables from an empty list value
and from a non-empty list value.
(b) [10points]ModifymakeEquationsFromExptogeneratetheappropriateequationstohandleempty
list values and non-empty list values. Note that for a non-empty list value, the equations have to
ensurethatthelistishomogeneous: Theheadofthelistmusthavethesametypeastheargument
of the tail of the list.
(c) [3 point] Modify canUnify to check if you can unify two list types.
(d) [3 point] Modify splitEquation to split a valid equation between list types into sub-equations.
Good Luck and Have Fun!
